#Author: Nick

Freesurfer is a collection of programs from folks in a well funded biomedical imaging center in Boston (Martinos Center) that's been used to analyze (primarily) structural neuroimaging scans. The name comes from Free- (open source and free) -surfer (where surf is short for surface, referring to a different way of representing the 3d scans). It might make more sense to call it free-surface-er but I imagine that is less catchy. Their website (https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/) has a wealth of information on this.

* Parcellation and Segmentation
The key task that Freesurfer accomplishes is to split the brain up into all of its different regions. This is done in a broadly two step process: 1. Segmentation, 2. Parcellation. 

The Segmentation step splits the brain into areas with clear borders and easy to differentiate [[tissue_contrast]]. This will separate out the structures in the [[subcortex]] and splits the cortex into the broad areas of [[white_matter]] and [[gray_matter]].

The Parcellation step concerns the gray matter labels and accomplishes the much trickier task of separating out the often indifferentiable grayscale voxels into their regions. This process uses surface representation of the scan, bayesian models of class-likelihoods, and a series of complex image-processing steps. At the end you get a map of each brain area annotating each voxel to its region and providing summary statistics like volume and average cortical thickness for each regions.

* Outputs 
These are a bit tricky and involved. See the separate [[freesurfer_outputs]] page for details. 

* Subfields 
  Recent versions of freesurfer have managed to further subdivide several key subcortical regions, including, for our interests, the [[hippocampus]] and the [[amygdala]]. See [[hippocampal_subfields]] and [[amygdala_nuclei]] for more details on each. 

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[tissue_contrast]: tissue_contrast "tissue_contrast"
[subcortex]: ../subcortex "subcortex"
[white_matter]: ../white_matter "white_matter"
[gray_matter]: ../gray_matter "gray_matter"
[freesurfer_outputs]: freesurfer_outputs "freesurfer_outputs"
[hippocampus]: ../hippocampus "hippocampus"
[amygdala]: ../amygdala "amygdala"
[hippocampal_subfields]: hippocampal_subfields "hippocampal_subfields"
[amygdala_nuclei]: amygdala_nuclei "amygdala_nuclei"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"