#Author: Nick

A structural scan is in some sense, the standard use of an MRI scanner. With this type of scan you can get relatively good spatial resolution with [[voxel]] dimensions approximately 1-4 cubic mm. 

* Resolution
For a very rough personal take on "good" vs "crappy" scan resolution anything more than 2x2x2mm resolution feels bad to me, 1x1x1-2x2x2mm feels standard, and sub 1x1x1mm feels surprisingly good. That's very "rough and ready" though and entirely possible others would disagree. Note that all examples I gave had the same resolution for each dimension. It is possible to have different sizes on the dimensions and this can create some challenges in some contexts.


* Sequences
Structural scans are frequently obtained through [[t1w]] [[scan_sequence]], though some forms of imaging might use a [[t2w]] sequence instead.

*Measures
Structural scans off the scanner only provide you a gray scale value for each voxel of the brain. In itself that is not necessarily helpful for research applications. At the very least it is necessary to do some level of preprocessing ([[structural_preprocessing]]). Following the preprocessing a number of useful algorithms can be run on the base image in order to extract useful features for research. The biggest few that come to mind are :
- [[brainage]]
- [[freesurfer]]
  - pradeep graynet
- [[voxel_based_morphometry]] morphometry one 
- 

# Quality control measurements
A scan's quality is surprisingly difficult to quantify. The gold standard is currently human visual assessment but this can be costly both in time and actual staffing costs. How to best quantify this is a topic of ongoing research but is far from solved. Several tools we use to generate quantitative estimates of a structural scan include: 
- [[CAT12]]
- [[mriqc]]
- [[qoala-t]] (using freesurfer outputs)






[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[voxel]: voxel "voxel"
[t1w]: t1w "t1w"
[t2w]: t2w "t2w"
[structural_preprocessing]: structural_preprocessing "structural_preprocessing"
[brainage]: brainage "brainage"
[freesurfer]: freesurfer "freesurfer"
[voxel_based_morphometry]: voxel_based_morphometry "voxel_based_morphometry"
[CAT12]: CAT12 "CAT12"
[mriqc]: mriqc "mriqc"
[qoala-t]: qoala-t "qoala-t"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"